Cilium MTU Model (#36)
cilium/design-cfps: cilium/CFP-14339-cilium-mtu-model.md

﻿# CFP-14339: Cilium MTU model

**SIG:** SIG-Datapath

> **State:** Dormant[^a]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Status:** Dormant[^a]
```

## Summary

Cilium 1.10 or earlier does not provide deterministic Ethernet MTU (Maximum
Transmission Unit) size configuration in environments where multiple networks
are exposed to the nodes where Cilium runs. This feature aims to configure MTU
consistently and optimally based on the available networks.

### Motivation

Cilium issue #14339[^o], Cilium is using wrong interface for MTU detection.

It is common in cloud environments to have multiple networks exposed to Cilium
where the MTU of the interfaces attached to those networks may vary quite
widely, such as allowing 1500 byte ethernet payloads via one network while
supporting as much as 9000 byte payloads via another network. Misconfiguration
of the MTU across different nodes can cause connectivity disruption,
particularly for UDP packets.

In some user environments, the Cilium 1.9 MTU calculation behaviour is
inconsistent as it is determined by either:

* `--mtu` flag (administrator override)
* `InitDefaultPrefix()` configures the node IP address
   * `->firstGlobalV4Addr()`
      * List all IPs from interfaces, except for interfaces that are down and
        docker interfaces
      * Pick the first one in the sorted list

> 
> We also currently expose only MTU and not MRU. Rather than considering transmit
> and receive separately to determine the maximum sizes that can be viably sent
> vs. received depending on the attached networks, we select a single MTU and
> derive the MRU based on the configured/detected MTU and other configuration
> such as ipsec, tunnel. This means that if the MTU we detected is incorrect,
> then we may configure the MRU in a way that may cause traffic drops on receive
> in cases where the packets could otherwise have been successfully received.

Author: I think that the following text adjustment would more accurately use the term MRU:

```suggestion
Cilium exposes only MTU and not MRU for all paths. Internally the code is not structured to clearly differentiate the maximum sizes that can be viably sent
vs. received depending on the attached networks. The logic selects a single MTU, treats
this as the MRU for all paths, then derives the MTU for tunnel paths based on other configuration
such as ipsec, tunnel. This means that if the MTU we detected is incorrect,
then we may configure either (a) device MTU on receive side in a way that may cause traffic drops, or (b) route MTU on transmit side in a way that may transmit packets which cannot be delivered.
```

### Goals

> 1. Consistently calculate MTU and MRU (Maximum Receive Unit) sizes on each node.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Consistently calculate MTU sizes on each node.
```

2. Guarantee that packets of any reasonable size may be successfully received,
   regardless of the attached networks.

> 3. Provide visibility into the MTU and MRU size calculation and status on each
>    node.

Author: ```suggestion
3. Provide visibility into the MTU and MRU size calculation and status for each path on each node.
```

4. In cloud environments with East-West MTU 9K + North-South MTU 1.5K,
   automatically configure in a way that allows pods to utilize 9K MTU.[^b][^c]

> 5. Nice-to-haves:
>    1. Minimize the likelihood of relying on IP fragmentation for connectivity
>    2. Provide best-effort optimization of MTU/MRU configuration with ability
>       for administrators to override with simple configuration.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Minimize the likelihood of relying on IP fragmentation for connectivity
```

### Non-Goals

* Assume that Kubernetes view of the network is the correct view, ignoring
  other networks

## Proposal

### Overview

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Assume that the user configures devices and routes on the host in a way that reflects the MTU of the paths accessible via those devices. Replicate the routes into each Cilium-managed Endpoints.

```

Regardless of whatever configuration you have, by default Cilium should be able
to successfully establish connectivity from local endpoints and the local stack
to arbitrary endpoints on any connected network. This might not provide optimal
performance depending on the networks available to the node, but in that case
we should provide visibility and configuration options so that administrators
can understand how Cilium is determining MTU/MRU, and configure Cilium in a way
that satisfies their use case.

> Use the available network devices on the node to calculate a maximum
> transmission unit (MTU) size and maximum receive unit (MRU) size separately in
> such a way that the lowest attached unit size will be the default MTU
> configured in routes[^d] for Cilium pods and the highest attached unit size
> will be the default MRU configured on devices for Cilium pods.

Author: ```suggestion
```

This CFP was originally intending to simply make MTU detection + application logic more consistent and observable, then provide the administrator the tools to configure more advanced MTU handling behaviour. However, based on feedback and discussion, there seems to be desire to go further and automatically ensure optimal MTU configuration for common use cases.

  * By default, "relevant" should correspond to every device available on the node
     * Should ignore some interfaces
        * `cilium_vxlan`
        * `cilium_host`
        * Virtual Ethernet (veth)
        * IPVLAN
        * Docker
        * IPVS (Cilium issue report[^n])
  * To allow more user control, we should have a deterministic way to control
    which networks are being considered.
    * Specific approaches to this configuration are discussed in the "Manual
      MTU/MRU override" section below.
* For each network, determine the MTU on that network.
  * If Cilium is configured with tunneling and/or encryption enabled, also add
    new network(s) to the set of "relevant" networks to represent these
    tunnel(s) and determine their MTU.
    * Simplest option for MTU would be to take the lowest available MTU of
      "relevant" networks and subtract vxlan, ipsec header lengths.
    * More intelligent option would figure out which path the tunnel would take
      and calculate MTU based on that network.
* Select the lowest available MTU from "relevant" networks and propagate that
  through `GetRouteMTU()`.

> * Select the highest available MTU (MRU really) from "relevant" networks and

Author: ```suggestion
* Select the highest available MTU from "relevant" networks and
```

  propagate that through `GetDeviceMTU()`.

### Manual MTU/MRU override

Each user you ask will provide a different response for how they want to
configure the MTU. Ideally we can optimize the automatic detection above such
that most users never have to worry about this, but when they do, this section
describes some options we have.

The new options below rely on arbitrary options provided to the Cilium agent
and interpret MTU semantics based on them. Assuming that there are multiple
options available, there would need to be a defined precedence around how the
MTU is actually calculated in the presence of multiple flags. If all must be
included, we could always add a `--mtu-mode=foo` option which the user would
also configure to disambiguate the options.

#### Existing: Configure `--mtu`

This option is already available in Cilium today, nothing new proposed in this section.

The `--mtu` flag overrides the MTU to be used across the cluster. This actually

> enforces both MTU and MRU configurations to be consistent across the cluster,

Author: ```suggestion
enforces MTU configurations on routes and devices to be consistent across the cluster,
```

for determining the MTU, then the administrator can override the setting.

This could plausibly be exposed through a parameter that accepts a set of
wildcards, for instance to select `eth*` devices and `wg*` interfaces.

#### New: Configure `--primary-network-cidr`[^f]

The idea here is to allow the administrator to select[^g][^h] which network
they consider to be the "primary" network based on the CIDR and derive the MTU
from this network. In this mode, even if the primary network has a higher MTU
than another attached network, Cilium would configure the MTU based on the
primary network. This could potentially cause connectivity issues for other
attached networks, but it would allow administrators to ignore other attached
networks if they believe they are not necessary for pod connectivity (for
example, non-Kubernetes networks; management networks; docker/ipvs/etc)

* Example use case: Cilium pod traffic should only consider Kubernetes networks
* Example use case: Cilium pod traffic should not use Kubernetes networks

### Status visibility

Example status command output (terse):

```
# cilium status
....

> MTU mode: auto, MTU 1450 [cilium_vxlan], MRU 1500 [eth0]

Author: ```suggestion
MTU mode: auto, min MTU 1450 [cilium_vxlan], max MTU 1500 [eth0]
```
